=== SOURCE: 10 selection criteria examples for your resumé - SEEK.pdf ===
=== CATEGORY: knowledge ===
=== EXTRACTED: 2026-05-21T08:14:16.667332 ===
============================================================

M enu
Career Advice Job hunting
Applying for jobs
10 selection criteria examples for your resumé
SEEK content team – updated on 07 M ay, 2024
Share
When you’re browsing job ads, you’ll notice that many of them ask you to respondto selection criteria in your cover letter. But what are they exactly? They’re the skills,knowledge and qualiﬁcations the employer thinks are essential for succeeding inthe role. 
By addressing these criteria in your cover letter, you can improve your chances ofadvancing to the next stage of the recruitment process. In this article, we exploremore about what ‘key selection criteria’ is, look at common criteria on job ads, andprovide a selection of criteria response examples you can use as a guide for yourcover letters.
Hi Nishant,
Want to explore jobspicked just for you?
Explore jobs
E.g. nurse, resume, interview, sales...

What is ‘key selection criteria’?  
Key selection criteria are the qualities, skills, knowledge and experience that a jobseeker needs to be able to perform in a role. A list of key selection criteria on a jobad tells you which attributes the employer thinks you need for the position. This listallows hiring managers to eﬃciently assess the job applications they receive.
As a job seeker, it’s important to pay attention to the key selection criteria of everyjob you apply for, to ﬁgure out whether you’re a good ﬁt for the role. If you matchthese criteria, you can use the selection criteria list as a guide when preparing yourjob application, to ensure you address the job role’s essential requirements.
Common types of key selection criteria 
There are diﬀerent types of key selection criteria, often categorised into three maingroups: technical skills, soft skills and personal attributes. By addressing each ofthe diﬀerent types of key selection criteria, you can show the hiring managerthat you’re suitable for the role.
1. Technical skills 
Technical skills refer to speciﬁc knowledge and abilities required to performparticular tasks. These are often acquired through education, training or previouswork experience and are directly related to the job’s duties. 
Examples of technical skills include:
Proﬁciency in software like M icrosoft Oﬃce or Adobe Creative Suite
Familiarity with coding languages such as JavaScript and Python for technicalroles
The ability to operate specialised equipment (tools, machinery, medicalequipment, electrical appliances, etc.)
2. Soft skills 
Soft skills are interpersonal skills that determine your ability to work and interactwith others. While soft skills are less tangible, they’re just as important as hard skills,and essential for successful teamwork, stakeholder management and problemsolving. 
Sought-after soft skills include:
Communication skills, including both verbal and written
Leadership and team-building skills 
Hi Nishant,
Want to explore jobspicked just for you?
Explore jobs

Time management and organisational abilities
3. Personal attributes 
Personal attributes are traits or qualities that shape how you approach work andcollaboration. These are often reﬂective of your work ethic, attitude and personalvalues. 
Examples of valuable personal attributes include:
Adaptability, or how you adjust to changes or handle unexpected challenges
Attention to detail, or your ability to do accurate, error-free work
Resilience shows that you can overcome setbacks
10 key selection criteria examples  
After identifying the job’s key selection criteria, it’s important to tailor yourapplication to suit. Here are some common criteria often listed in job descriptions,along with a few tips for addressing selection criteria, with examples.
Communication skills 
Communication skills refer to your ability to clearly convey information, verballyand in writing, to diﬀerent audiences. They’re important across a range of roleswhether you’re working as part of a team, liaising with clients or customers, ortaking on a leadership role.
Here are a couple of examples addressing selection criteria to do withcommunication.
Example 1:
I have a high level of communication skills, both verbal and written. In my previousrole, I was often meeting facilitator and took minutes for my team’s weeklymeetings. I also attended departmental meetings, providing updates on projectmilestones and addressing questions from stakeholders.
Example 2:
During my time as a customer service representative, I demonstrated exceptionalverbal communication skills when dealing with guests. In most instances, I was ableto diﬀuse situations by working with the customer to understand their issue andprovide a resolution without escalating to my manager.
Strong analytical and problem-solving skills 
Hi Nishant,
Want to explore jobspicked just for you?
Explore jobs

Analytical and problem-solving skills refer to your ability to analyse situations,identify underlying issues, and implement practical solutions. Employees withstrong analytical and problem-solving skills can help improve eﬃciency andproductivity in their workplaces. 
Example:
M y current role as a project manager requires strong analytical and problem-solving abilities. M y responsibilities include identifying bottlenecks and testingsolutions to streamline our workﬂow. 
Ability to work well under pressure 
When you work well under pressure, you’re able to maintain performancestandards and manage priorities in challenging situations. These skills are importantin the workplace for meeting deadlines while maintaining work quality. 
Example:
M y current role as a graphic designer frequently involves juggling competingprojects. To keep my work quality high, I have developed strategies to help meprioritise, and I truly enjoy the excitement and energy of working in a fast-pacedenvironment. 
Demonstrated leadership skills 
Leadership skills refer to your ability to guide, motivate, and inspire a team towardachieving organisational goals. Whether you’re looking to move into a leadershiprole or wanting to take the lead on a project, leadership skills can help advanceyour career.
Example: 
I have proven leadership skills, demonstrated in my last two roles, where I haveled teams to exceed their KPIs. I currently manage a ﬁve-person team, delegatingtasks, overseeing work, and encouraging collaboration, to meet and exceed projectmilestones. I have the lowest staﬀ turnover rate of any team leader in my company. 
Commitment to continuous professional development 
M any employers value continuous professional development. Showing acommitment to lifelong learning shows that you’re proactive in developing yourskills and knowledge, and will work to keep yourself an asset to your employer. 
Example:
I am dedicated to continuous professional development, actively seekingopportunities to improve my skills and knowledge in my ﬁeld. I regularly attend
Hi Nishant,
Want to explore jobspicked just for you?
Explore jobs

workshops, webinars and industry conferences, and have a list of recentcertiﬁcations. 
Technical proﬁciency 
Technical proﬁciency involves possessing speciﬁc technical skills or knowledgerelevant to the role. This varies depending on your industry, with each rolerequiring speciﬁc skills and knowledge. 
Example:
I regularly update my skills through online courses and on-the-job training. Ibelieve it’s important to stay informed about advancements in my ﬁeld and also tocontribute my own knowledge to help others. I keep up to date by subscribing toindustry newsletters and attending local workshops. 
Ability to work as part of a team 
Eﬀective collaboration involves working with others to achieve common goals. It’simportant for all workplaces, because it means you’re an easy person to work with.Ability to work as part of a team includes things like supporting colleagues andkeeping an open mind about others’ perspectives.
Example:
I believe I work best as part of a collaborative team, paired with other professionalswho inspire and support each other. I have years of experience working in teamswith diverse backgrounds and from diﬀerent disciplines, and genuinely enjoy thesocial aspect of collaborating with others.
Eﬀective time management 
Time-management skills are highly valued by employers. They refer to your abilityto prioritise tasks and use your time eﬃciently to meet deadlines. Not only doesthis help improve the quality of your work, but it can also help reduce stress. 
Example: 
Through years of being a private tutor, I have developed excellent time-management strategies, allowing me to book up to 20 students per week withoutsacriﬁcing the quality of my teaching. I have many long-term students that I havehelped throughout entire degrees to graduation.
Attention to detail 
Attention to detail means performing tasks with precision and accuracy. By payingattention to the ﬁner details, you can reduce the chance of errors and producehigher quality work. 
Hi Nishant,
Want to explore jobspicked just for you?
Explore jobs

Example:
I am detail-oriented and take pride in my work, paying close attention to smalldetails and often picking up small errors that other people miss. 
Adaptability and ﬂexibility 
Flexibility is a personal attribute that is highly valued among employers, so it’soften worth demonstrating your capability to adjust to new challenges, work inunpredictable conditions, and adapt to changes in the workplace.
Example:
I am a ﬂexible and adaptable worker who welcomes new challenges. I’m alwaysopen to learning new skills and processes, as demonstrated by my role as unoﬃcialteam trainer in my current position. I’m always the ﬁrst to volunteer upskilling myco-workers.  
As a job seeker, it’s essential to identify the selection criteria listed in a job ad, andaddress each point in your job application. Pay close attention to what the hiringmanager is asking for and adjust your resumé and cover letter to include thesespeciﬁcs. By matching your application to the selection criteria, you’ve got a betterchance of making it through the application stage to an interview.  
FAQs 
What is the best selection criteria? 
The best selection criteria will depend on the role as well as the objectives andvalues of the hiring company. The best selection criteria to have are the ones thatmatch the requirements and objectives of the job, as listed in the ad. 
What should be included in selection criteria? 
Selection criteria should include speciﬁc attributes, qualiﬁcations, skills andexperience deemed essential or desirable for a job. The selection criteria shouldaddress all relevant aspects of the role: qualiﬁcations, experience, skills andpersonal attributes. 
What are the ﬁve selection criteria?  
Selection criteria typically fall under ﬁve categories, including:
1. Qualiﬁcations
2. Experience
3. Technical skills
Hi Nishant,
Want to explore jobspicked just for you?
Explore jobs

4. Soft skills
5. Personal attributes
How do you answer key selection criteria in a cover letter? 
When answering the key selection criteria in your cover letter, use the STARapproach. The below example of key selection criteria responses for a cover letterdemonstrates how you can use this method: 
Situation: describe the situation where you used the skill/attribute.
Task: follow that with the task or the role you played.
Action: explain the actions you took to address the situation or task.
Result: detail the outcome or impact of your actions, emphasising anyachievements or successes.
How many kinds of selection criteria are there? 
There are a number of diﬀerent types of selection criteria that fall into broadcategories: qualiﬁcations, experience, technical skills, soft skills and personalattributes. Some positions might also have selection criteria that relate to ethicalvalues or employee background.
What are selection criteria used to assess? 
Hiring managers use selection criteria to assess whether a job seeker’squaliﬁcations, skills, experience, knowledge and personal attributes match therequirements of the position. 
For example, if you’re applying for a government position, common governmentselection criteria examples include:
A bachelor’s degree or higher
A clean background check (no criminal history)
Working with Children Check (for the education sector)
Citizenry
Experience working in a large, complex organisation
Strong computer literacy (for oﬃce positions)
Stakeholder management
What are some examples of selection criteria? 
Hi Nishant,
Want to explore jobspicked just for you?
Explore jobs

Here are some examples of selection criteria:
Qualiﬁcations: possesses a relevant degree, certiﬁcation or qualiﬁcation in theﬁeld.
Technical skills: proﬁcient in programming languages, including Python, Javaand C++.
Personal attributes: analytical, adaptable, empathetic, creative, self-motivated.
How do you answer key selection criteria questions?
Answering key selection criteria requires a structured approach to ensure youprovide relevant examples that demonstrate your suitability for a role. Start byunderstanding the selection criteria and identifying examples that match. Fromhere, you can use the STAR approach to tailor your answer. Provide clear evidenceof your accomplishments and keep your response concise.  
How can I spot key selection criteria hidden within a joblisting? 
Selection criteria are either listed separately in a job ad or written into the jobdescription. Look for recurring phrases or keywords, like ‘required skills’, ‘idealapplicant’, ‘ability to…’, and ‘proﬁcient in’. This language often indicates keyselection criteria. 
M ore from this category: Applying for jobs
Latest Internship jobs on SEEK
Be one of the ﬁrst to discover these recently listed jobs, or browse all Internship jobs on SEEK right now.
Location
Australia
Research Analyst Internship
KOSEC
Sydney NSW
Full Time
Banking & Financial Services
Marketing Assistant - SocialMedia/Content Creation(Paid Internship)
POP M ART OCEANIA PTY LTD
Sydney NSW
Part Time Internships
Stryker
Sydney NSW
Part Time
Healthcare & M edical
Hi Nishant,
Want to explore jobspicked just for you?
Explore jobs

Popular on SEEK
Explore related topics
Choose an area of interest to browse related careers.
Resumes
Finding the job for you
First job
Job interviews
2d ago
Part Time
M arketing & Communications
4d ago 10d ago
Browse all related jobs on SEEK
A guide to writingshort condolence…
 Understandingsecondment: What i…
 5 essentialcommunication styl…
 20 positive charactertraits for workplace…
Hi Nishant,
Want to explore jobspicked just for you?
Explore jobs

Cover letters
SEEK Proﬁle
Applying for jobs
Returning to Work
Subscribe to Career Advice
Get expert career advice delivered to your inbox.
First name
Last name
Email
By providing your personal information, you agree to the Collection Notice and Privacy Policy. You can unsubscribe at any time.
Subscribe
Job seekers
Job search
Employers
Register for free
Hi Nishant,
Want to explore jobspicked just for you?
Explore jobs

Proﬁle
Recommended jobs
Saved searches
Saved jobs
Applied jobs
Career advice
Explore careers
Explore salaries
Explore companies
Post a job ad
Products & prices
Customer service
Hiring advice
M arket insights
Recruitment software partners
About us
About SEEK
Newsroom
Investors
Careers
Contact
Help centre
Contact us
Product & tech blog
SEEK videos
Downloadapps
SEEKsites
Internationalpartners
Partnerservices
Social
Hi Nishant,
Want to explore jobspicked just for you?
Explore jobs

SEEK acknowledges the Traditional Custodians of the lands on which it operates its online employment marketplace. The gum leaf represents a symbol of welcome and itacknowledges the diverse countries, environments and communities.
Artwork by Bitja, Dixon Patten Jnr, Gunnai, Gunditjmara, Yorta Yorta and Dhudhuroa, Bayila Creative.
Terms & conditions
Security & Privacy
© SEEK. All rights reserved
Hi Nishant,
Want to explore jobspicked just for you?
Explore jobs