Home  How to apply How to reply to selection criteria
How to write key selection criteria
Well written key selection criteria may help you get an interview.
Many roles in the public sector ask you to write responses to key selection criteria. But
some don’t.
Check the job advertisement and position description to see if you need to respond to
key selection criteria.
If you do, a selection panel will read your responses to work out if they want to interview
you.
Use your responses to help prepare for your interview, as they’re good answers to refer
to.
Step 1: brainstorm key words and ideas
Copy and paste the criteria from the position description into a new document.
For each criterion:
Step 2: write a statement using the SAO approach
Write a statement under each criterion of 60 to 120 words using the SAO approach:
Step 3: proofread your statements
Each of your responses to the criteria should be:
highlight the keys words you think the employer is looking for
list examples of your skills, experience, incidents, training, personal qualities and
expertise
Situation, where and when you did something
Action, what you did and how you did it
Outcome, what was the result of your actions 

Key selection criteria examples
KSC1: Problem solving - Seeks all relevant facts. Liaises with stakeholders. Analyses
issues from different perspectives and draws sound inferences from available data.
Identiﬁes and proposes workable solutions.
Problem solving has been a critical part of my roles over the past ﬁve years. While
working as Customer Complaints Ofﬁcer at Acme Department Stores, I dealt with a
variety of problems. While many could be resolved easily, two to three per week were
more complex and required a detailed process to resolve. I had to investigate what had
happened from the staff and customer's points of view, clarify the facts, and work out
what had gone wrong and why. I then had to propose suitable solutions and negotiate a
mutually satisfactory outcome. I was often commended by my manager for my
sensitive handling and speedy resolution of these problems. Less than one per cent of
complaints had to be escalated.
KSC2: Advanced computer skills - Uses a wide range of software features for word
processing, spreadsheets, etc. Helps others solve problems with software.
As Personal Assistant to the Marketing Manager at SYZ Enterprises, about half my time
was spent preparing letters and reports for clients using Word. I also used detailed
information in Excel spreadsheets to prepare graphs and tables, to demonstrate the
results of our market research and to analyse client company performance. I often
prepared major PowerPoint presentations for my manager and maintained a database
of her contacts. I also managed many daily emails and searched for information on the
Internet to answer questions.
KSC3: Sound communication, interpersonal and negotiating skills, including well-
developed written and oral skills, and the ability to develop and deliver interpretation
and education services.
In my ﬁve years as a teacher, strong communication, negotiation and interpersonal
skills have been essential. I have dealt with a wide range of people, including parents,
colleagues and students. I was involved in a community project where I co-wrote a
booklet on helping children learn and have fun. As part of this project, I led successful
negotiations with the local council and three schools in the area who agreed to run a
series of weekend family science programs for kids in the area.
free of errors
concise, precise and relevant
factual and positive
about your capabilities and experience

Copyright Privacy Accessibility Disclaimer Site map
Contact Us
Powered by ApplyDirect
State Government of Victoria, Australia © 2022
The Victorian Government acknowledges the traditional Aboriginal
owners of country throughout Victoria and pays respect to them, their
culture and their Elders past, present and future.
National
relay
service
Deaf, hearing or speech impaired? Contact the National Relay Service:
Call 1800 555 660 or visit www.relayservice.com.au